The Project Gutenberg eBook of Delicious Recipes including Toll House
Chocolate Cookies, by Lamont, Curliss and Company

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Delicious Recipes including Toll House Chocolate Cookies

Author: Lamont, Curliss and Company

Release Date: June 4, 2021 [eBook #65510]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DELICIOUS RECIPES INCLUDING TOLL
HOUSE CHOCOLATE COOKIES ***




                           DELICIOUS RECIPES
                               _including_
                              _Toll House_
                           CHOCOLATE COOKIES


                                NESTLÉ’s
                          SEMI-SWEET CHOCOLATE
                             (Yellow Label)


Be sure to use ...

    [Illustration: Package image]




                           7^oz. ECONOMY SIZE
                                Nestlé’s
                               SEMI-SWEET
                               CHOCOLATE
       PETER CAILLER KOHLER SWISS CHOCOLATES CO INC FULTON, N. Y.

                              At your grocer’s or favorite candy counter




               The Story of the Famous Toll House Cookies


In New England, on the outskirts of Whitman, Massachusetts, stands a
lovely old Cape Cod house. Back in the early 1700’s it was used as a
toll house where passengers changed their horses, dined, and paid their
toll charges.

    [Illustration: THE TOLL HOUSE AT WHITMAN, MASS.]

It was here in 1930 that Ruth Wakefield, a well-known dietician and
lecturer, started her now famous inn, calling it “The Toll House,” where
old-fashioned favorites and new recipes are carefully prepared and
served in a modern atmosphere.

Among these delicious recipes which Mrs. Wakefield has created is the
new and different kind of chocolate cookie. This recipe listed on the
opposite page, is taken from Mrs. Wakefield’s own cook book. All other
recipes contained in this booklet have been derived from other sources.

There is a taste surprise in these tender, golden brown Toll House
cookies. A creamy bit of Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate and the flavor of
walnut make a particularly happy combination. Only with Nestlé’s
Semi-Sweet Chocolate can you achieve this perfect blend of flavor.

           Copyright 1939, by Lamont, Corliss & Co., New York




                               Toll House
                         _CHOCOLATE COOKIES_[1]


  Cream
  1 cup butter, add
  ¾ cup brown sugar
  ¾ cup granulated sugar and
  2 eggs beaten whole. Dissolve
  1 tsp. soda in
  1 tsp. hot water, and mix alternately with
  2¼ cups flour sifted with
  1 tsp. salt. Lastly add
  1 cup chopped nuts and
  2 Economy size bars (7 oz. ea.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate which
              have been cut in pieces the size of a pea.
  Flavor with
  1 tsp. vanilla and drop by half teaspoons on a greased cookie sheet.
              Bake 10 to 12 minutes in 375° F. oven.
  Makes 100 cookies.


[1]This and other delicious recipes may be found in Mrs. Ruth
    Wakefield’s cook book “Toll House Tried and True Recipes.” On sale
    at all bookstores.


                           DIRECTIONS FOR USE

Here’s a hint! Before starting your Toll House Chocolate Cookies, unwrap
your bar of Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet and put it in a spot slightly warmer
than room temperature (about 80° F.), but do not melt. You’ll be
surprised to see how easy it is to cut the bar with your paring knife.




                            _BISHOP’S CAKE_


  1½ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  1½ teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  3 eggs, well-beaten
  1 cup granulated sugar
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  2 cups coarsely chopped walnut meats
  1 cup coarsely cut-up dates
  1 cup halved candied cherries

Cut chocolate into pieces the size of a pea.

Sift the dry ingredients together three times.

Add the sugar to the well-beaten eggs, and beat again.

Add the chocolate, nuts, dates and cherries to the flour mixture. Then
fold this into the egg mixture.

Pour into a greased loaf pan, about 9½″ x 5½″ x 2¾″, with bottom lined
with waxed paper. Bake in moderate oven of 325° F. for 1½ hours.

Tested and approved by Good Housekeeping Institute.




                       _CHOCOLATE DATE NUT CAKE_


  ¼ cup butter
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, beaten
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  2½ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup chopped dates
  ½ cup chopped walnuts

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Cream butter and sugar. Add eggs and melted chocolate, mix thoroughly.

Sift together flour, salt, baking powder and spices three times. Add to
chocolate mixture alternately with milk.

Beat well. Add vanilla, dates and nuts.

Bake in greased loaf tin at 375° F. 40 to 45 minutes.

(Serve with Foamy Lemon Sauce.)




                        _CHOCOLATE MARBLE CAKE_


  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  ½ cup butter
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs well beaten
  2 cups sifted cake flour
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  grated rind of one orange

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Cream together butter and sugar.

Add eggs, beat well.

Sift flour, salt and baking powder three times. Add flour mixture
alternately with milk. Mix after each addition. Add vanilla.

Divide batter in half. To one half, add grated rind; to other half, add
melted chocolate.

Place alternate spoonfuls of the two batters side by side in greased
loaf tin. Cut through batter with a spatula several times in each
direction.

Bake at 350° F. for about 50 minutes.




                        _STANDARD ONE-EGG CAKE_


  1½ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  2½ teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup butter
  ⅔ cup sugar
  1 egg
  ½ cup milk
  ¾ teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour with baking powder and salt three times.

Cream butter, add sugar gradually, beat. Add beaten egg.

Add dry ingredients alternately with milk. Beat. Add vanilla. Bake at
350° F. for 30 minutes.




                      _ECONOMY DEVIL’S FOOD CAKE_


  ⅓ cup butter
  ¾ cup sugar
  1 egg, unbeaten
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  ½ cup thick sour cream
  ¾ cup sweet milk
  2 cups sifted cake flour
  1 teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Melt chocolate in double boiler, cream butter and sugar thoroughly. Add
egg, mix well, and stir in the melted chocolate. Mix in sour cream.

Sift dry ingredients together three times, add alternately with milk.
Mix well. Add vanilla.

Bake in two well-greased 9″ pans at 350° F. for 35 minutes.

Serve with Orange Filling and Frosting.




                        _FLUFFY CHOCOLATE CAKE_


  ⅔ cup butter
  1 cup sugar
  3 eggs, well beaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup milk

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Cream butter and sugar. Add eggs, vanilla and stir in melted chocolate.

Sift dry ingredients together three times. Add alternately with milk to
chocolate mixture, beat after each addition until smooth.

Bake in two well-greased pans at 350° F. for 35 minutes.

Serve with Nestlé’s Chocolate Fudge Frosting.




                    _CHOCOLATE REFRIGERATOR COOKIES_


  ½ cup butter
  1½ cups brown sugar
  1 egg, unbeaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  1 cup chopped walnuts

Cut chocolate into pieces the size of a pea.

Cream butter and sugar thoroughly. Add unbeaten egg and mix until
smooth. Sift together flour, baking powder and salt three times. Add to
butter and sugar mixture.

Add chocolate pieces and nuts to the mixture. Shape dough into a firm
roll about 2 inches in diameter.

Roll tightly in wax paper and store in refrigerator until ready to bake.

Cut in ¼-inch slices. Bake at 350° F. 15 to 20 minutes.




                      _CHOCOLATE OATMEAL COOKIES_


  ½ cup butter
  1 cup brown sugar
  Rind of one orange
  1 egg, unbeaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup sifted all-purpose flour
  1½ cups rolled oats
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate

Cut chocolate into pieces the size of a pea.

Cream butter and sugar. Add grated rind of an orange.

Add egg, salt, and vanilla, and beat well. Stir in flour and oatmeal.

Add the chocolate pieces and work into batter.

Form into small mounds on a cookie sheet. Bake for 15 to 20 minutes at
350° F. to 375° F.




                      _CHOCOLATE COCOANUT KISSES_


  3 egg whites
  1½ cups sifted confectioners’ sugar
  1 tablespoon flour
  ½ cup shredded cocoanut
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate

Cut chocolate into pieces the size of a pea.

Sift sugar and flour.

Beat egg whites until stiff. Gradually sprinkle sugar and flour mixture
over egg whites and continue beating.

Add vanilla, chocolate and cocoanut. Mix together.

Drop by teaspoonfuls on greased cookie sheet.

Bake at 500° F.—10 minutes or until light brown in color.

Allow cookies to cool slightly before removing from sheet.




                          _CHOCOLATE DERBIES_


  1⅓ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon baking soda
  ½ cup butter
  ⅛ cup granulated sugar
  ¼ cup brown sugar
  1 egg yolk
  ½ Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate

Cut chocolate into pieces of 4 squares each.

Sift flour, salt and soda three times.

Cream shortening, add sugars gradually. Mix thoroughly.

Add egg yolk and beat well.

Place dough on lightly floured board—Roll thin—Cut into small circles
about 1½″ in diameter with cookie cutter.

Put circle on an unbuttered cookie sheet—place a piece of chocolate on
top of it and over this lay another one of the circles forming a
sandwich. The oven heat will seal the cookie.

Bake at 425° F.—10 minutes or until golden brown.

Remove from pan while still hot.




                           _WALNUT SPICE BAR_


  ⅛ cup boiling water
  ¼ teaspoon ginger
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  ¼ cup butter
  ¼ cup brown sugar
  ¼ cup molasses
  ½ teaspoon soda
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  1½ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup chopped walnuts

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Dissolve spices in boiling water, pour over softened butter. Add sugar,
molasses mixed with soda, blend thoroughly.

Stir in melted chocolate. Work in sifted flour and salt.

Shape dough into a firm roll about 2 inches in diameter. Roll tightly in
wax paper and store in refrigerator until ready to bake.

Cut in ¼-inch slices and sprinkle with chopped walnuts. Bake at 350° F.
for 15 minutes.




                          _CHOCOLATE THINSIES_


  ¾ cup butter
  ½ cup brown sugar
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  pecan meats

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Cream butter and sugar. Add vanilla and melted chocolate.

Sift together salt and flour. Add to chocolate mixture and blend
thoroughly.

Shape batter into an oblong mold. Wrap in waxed paper and chill ½ hour
before baking.

Slice thin—press pecan meat into each cookie.

Bake at 450° F.—15 to 20 minutes.

Allow to cool slightly before removing from cookie sheet.




                         _CHOCOLATE MACAROONS_


  2 egg whites
  ½ cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  1½ cups cocoanut, shredded

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Beat egg whites until foamy. Gradually sift in sugar, beating after each
addition, until mixture is smooth.

Continue beating until mixture stands in peaks. Add salt and vanilla,
and fold in melted chocolate.

Add cocoanut. Mix and drop in small mounds onto ungreased brown paper.

Bake in slow oven 325° F. for 20 minutes. Cool a few minutes before
removing from paper.




                        _CHOCOLATE TEA BISCUITS_


  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  1 tablespoon baking powder
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons sugar
  3 tablespoons shortening
  ¾ cup milk
  ½ Economy Size (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate

Cut chocolate into pieces the size of a pea.

Cut in fat rather evenly, sift flour, baking powder, salt and sugar. Add
liquid.

Manipulate lightly until dough leaves side of bowl. Flour board and
knead, lightly. Roll out. Sprinkle cut up pieces of chocolate on dough
and roll up.

Cut in one inch slices and put into small greased muffin tins with
rolled side up.

Brush top of biscuits with melted butter and sprinkle with a mixture of
sugar and cinnamon.

Bake in 425° F. oven for about 15 minutes. Remove from pan while still
warm.




                        _CHOCOLATE CHIFFON PIE_


  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  3 eggs, separated
  ½ cup sugar
  3 tablespoons hot water
  rind of one orange
  1 baked pie shell (9 inch)

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Beat egg yolks until light and lemon-colored. Add ¼ cup sugar, continue
beating until stiff.

Grate in rind of one orange, add 3 tablespoons hot water.

Place in a double boiler and cook until slightly thickened. Remove from
fire, add melted chocolate, gradually. Mix thoroughly and cool slightly.

Beat egg whites until stiff. Add ¼ cup sugar. Fold egg whites into
chocolate mixture, and pour into baked pie shell.

Place in 375° F. oven for 3 or 4 minutes, then remove and allow to set
for several hours before serving.

Garnish as desired with whipped cream or meringue.




                         _CHOCOLATE CREAM PIE_


  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  2½ cups milk
  ½ cup sugar
  6 tablespoons sifted all-purpose flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2 egg whites, beaten stiff
  ½ cup cream, whipped

Break chocolate into pieces and heat with the milk in a double boiler.
Beat with egg beater until thoroughly blended.

Add sugar, salt and flour, stirring constantly until mixture thickens.
Cook an additional 10 minutes.

Beat in egg yolks and cook for 2 minutes more. Remove from fire.

Stir in butter, add vanilla, cool.

Beat egg whites and fold into chocolate mixture.

Pour into baked 9-inch pie shell. Garnish with whipped cream if desired.




                         _CHOCOLATE CREAM ROLL_


  1 cup sifted all-purpose flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  3 eggs, well beaten
  1 cup sugar
  5 tablespoons cold water
  1 teaspoon vanilla (or lemon extract)
  ½ cup heavy cream
  ½ Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate

Sift flour once; measure; then sift together with baking powder and salt
three times.

Add eggs. Sift in sugar gradually, beating constantly. Beat in water and
flavoring.

Add sifted dry ingredients all at once. Beat the batter until smooth and
well blended.

Pour immediately into a shallow pan (10 by 15 in.) which has been
greased and lined with greased paper. Fill the pan to a depth of only
half an inch. Bake in a 350° F. oven for 15 to 20 minutes, or until the
top springs back when pressed with a finger.

While the cake is baking, melt the chocolate in double boiler. Blend
with the cream which has been whipped.

As soon as the cake is done, turn out on a towel which has been well
sprinkled with confectioners’ sugar. Cut off the edges of the cake, and
roll at once. When cool, unroll and spread with the chocolate cream
filling. Roll again. Cover with waxed paper until set.




                          _CHOCOLATE FROSTING_


  1 Economy Size (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate—melted
  2 tbs. butter
  1 cup sifted confectioners’ sugar
  ¼ cup hot milk

Melt chocolate and add butter and sifted sugar.

Add milk slowly and beat until smooth and satiny.




                  _CHOCOLATE FILLING FOR CREAM PUFFS_


  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  ⅔ cup sugar
  ⅓ cup sifted all-purpose flour
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  2 cups scalded milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2 eggs or egg yolks

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Mix the dry ingredients. Add scalded milk gradually. Cook 15 minutes in
a double boiler, stirring constantly until mixture thickens, and
afterwards occasionally.

Add eggs, slightly beaten, and cook 2 or 3 minutes longer.

Remove from fire. Add melted chocolate. Cool and flavor.

Use as a filling for your favorite cream puff recipe.




                           _CHOCOLATE FUDGE_


  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  1 cup milk
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  ½ cup brown sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  3 tablespoons butter
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup coarsely broken walnuts

Break up chocolate and dissolve in milk, stirring until mixture is
smooth.

Add sugars and salt. Stir until sugars are dissolved then continue
cooking _without stirring_ to 234° F. or soft ball stage. Remove from
fire.

Add vanilla and butter, cool to 110° F. without beating.

Then beat until mixture begins to thicken. Add nuts and pour into
wax-lined pans—about 8″ x 4″.

Cut into squares.




                     _CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM DE LUXE_


  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate
  1 tablespoon white corn syrup
  ½ pint of heavy cream
  2 egg whites beaten stiffly

Melt chocolate in double boiler.

Add corn syrup and stir.

Add melted chocolate mixture to cream, which has been beaten until thick
but not stiff, and beat well.

Pour into freezing tray of electric refrigerator, and freeze to a mush;
remove from tray and stir in the stiffly beaten egg whites. Return to
tray and freeze.

Stir once to insure smoothness, and return to refrigerator.

Freezing time, two hours.

Serves six.




                       _CHOCOLATE CHIP ICE CREAM_


  1 Economy Size Bar (7 oz.) Nestlé’s Semi-Sweet Chocolate, chipped
  ½ pint heavy cream
  2 eggs, separated
  3 tablespoons sugar
  ½ teaspoon vanilla

Beat egg whites stiff but not dry; add 1 tablespoon sugar.

Whip cream to custard like consistency. Beat egg yolks until lemon
color; add 2 tablespoons sugar and combine with cream.

Combine first ingredients and add chocolate and vanilla. Pour into
freezing tray of refrigerator and freeze.

    [Illustration: _A song in their hearts_]




                               10 SECONDS
                           to make delicious
                              Hot Nestlé’s

                      Three teaspoonfuls in a cup.

                     Add hot water and stir. Ready
                        to serve in 10 seconds.

                     The milk and sugar are in it.

Naturally, a HOT drink is a better way to start the day. And, in HOT
Nestlé’s you have a ten-second breakfast drink that costs no more per
cup than ordinary cocoa!

NESTLÉ’S EverReady COCOA is blended from choice cocoa and pure whole
milk, sweetened to just the right degree and already cooked for you. No
messy hard-to-wash pans! No disagreeable “skin” on top! All you have to
do is to add hot water.

                   Write for your free 2 cup sample.

                       PETER CAILLER KOHLER SWISS
                        CHOCOLATES COMPANY, INC.
                   60 HUDSON STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y.

                      1048 F    Printed in U.S.A.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics (or underlined text) is
  delimited by _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DELICIOUS RECIPES INCLUDING TOLL
HOUSE CHOCOLATE COOKIES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
